PROFESSOR: In this module, we're going to learn about exploratory data
analysis in stata, focusing on some key commands, such as summarize and
tabulate, which we'll use consistently throughout this course, as well as
describe, code book, and list.
Within Stata, open up the Framingham data set, and let's start exploring
this data set.
The first thing we're going to do is describe, and get a picture of all the
variables that are contained in this data set.
In order to be able to do that, there's a few commands that are
typically used.
First, in the command line, type describe, and you'll see that, for
each variable in the data set, we get a bunch of information, as well as we
get some information about the data set as a whole.
For instance, the data set contains 4,434 observations, it contains 74
variables, and it gives us an idea of the size of this data set.
So if I want to scroll down and look at a bunch of the different variables
in this data set, I can either click on More, or I can hit the space bar.
And you'll see that I get a bunch of information for each covariant.
So scrolling back up, we see that within the describe command, we get
the variable name, we get the type of variable, the type that it's stored
as, we get the display format, the value label, and the variable label.
So for now, let's just focus on the variable name and the variable label,
and what information that gives us.
So for instance, we see that this hostmi variable, that's the name, but
if I wanted to know what's contained in that variable, I could go over to
variable label, and I see that it's instant hospitalized myocardial
infarctions, or MIs.
OK, so you can see the basic information that's provided in the
describe command.
If this just isn't quite enough information for you, go
ahead and type in.
So before I type anything else into the command line, I have to scroll
through all the variables in the data set, hit the space bar.
Or if I want to break the command, I can go up here and hit the red X,
which is break.
So I've ended the describe command.
Now if I want to get more information about the variables in the data set, I
can type in code book.
You can see that for every variable in the data set, I now get a whole lot of
information.
So scrolling through let's look at the death indicator.
So for death, you can see that the type of variable is numeric.
It's stored as a number.
The range of that number goes from zero to one, and it takes on two
different unique values.
I just marked over that, but you see.
It actually gives us the tabulation.
It tells us down here that 2,884 people were alive at the end of
surveillance in this data set, and that 1,550 people
were dead at the end.
Another extremely useful piece of information is this over here, this
missing information.
So it tells us that zero out of the 4,434 observations in our data set
were missing.
So code book is a good way to get an idea of exactly what's contained in a
variable, and also, very importantly, how much missing
data is in that variable.
So death was a binary variable.
If we scroll down, we're going to run into some continuous
covariants, such as timemi.
So this is time to incident myocardial infarction.
Scroll up a little bit, and see what's contained in that.
So now this is a continuous variable.
You'll see that the type of this variable now, it's stored as a
numeric, or double is what it says.
So it means that this is a continuous number in our data set.
We can see now that the range goes from 0 to 24, representing that this
data set goes from 0 to 24 years.
It takes on a bunch of different unique values, and it gives you these
summary statistics that we learned about in class this week.
It gives you a mean, a standard deviation, and then you go down here,
and you can see the percentiles for this data set.
And again, the very important information, the number of missing
data points for this covariant.
OK, so this gives you a good idea of what code book and describe do.
Now if I just typed in code book, you can see that I get information for all
74 variables in my data set.
That's usually too much, so I'm going to break that.
Let's say I only wanted information about BMI in my data set.
Then I could type code book, BMI 1, BMI 2, BMI 3, and that's going to give
me the code book information for BMI at exams one, two, and three.
So now I no longer get information for 74 variables.
I only get the three that I asked for.
The same thing could be done with the describe command, and you see that
now, if I specify variables, I'm only now describing the
variables that I specify.
So this is usually a more concise way of describing the variables that
you're particularly interested in.
All right.
So let's move on.
Let's calculate some summary statistics.
The first thing I want to do is look at the summarize command.
So there are several ways to access the summarize command.
I could just type in summarize into the command line, and specify a
variable that I'm interested in.
Alternatively, let's look at how to access the summarize command through
the drop down menu.
I would go statistics, summaries, tables, and tests, summary and
descriptive statistics, and it's this first option, summary statistics.
So I click on that, and this window pops up for the summarize command.
Now I'm going to look at the properties of systolic blood pressure
at baseline or at exam one in our study population.
So that's this sysbp1 covariant.
So I type that into my variables window, and I hit submit.
Now the difference between hitting submit and OK within a window in
stata, is that if I hit OK, the window goes away.
If I hit submit, the window would stay there.
So if I want to get the window back, I'm going to go db summarize, and you
see that the window comes back.
OK.
So let's leave that window there for now.
Let's look at what the summarize command provided for us.
So you can see the summarize command, as it stands, it gives you the number
of non missing observations versus solid blood pressure at exam one.
It gives you the mean, standard deviation, the
minimum, and the maximum.
So if I wanted to know what is the mean systolic blood pressure, I would
simply look at this mean column, and I would say that the mean is 132.9.
If I wanted the standard deviation, again, just go over to the standard
deviation column, and I see that it's 22.4.
OK, so you see the basic information provided by the summarize command, but
now we move on, and let's say we want to know more information.
I want to know, what is the median or the 50th percentile of systolic blood
pressure at exam one?
If I just type in summarize systolic blood pressure 1, you see that the
median does not appear there.
So I want the median, I need to go back and look at
this summarize window.
So within the summarize window, I can say either--
within the options, I can either use the standard display, or I can display
additional statistics.
Fortunately, I know that when I ask for additional statistics, the median
is going to be provided.
So go ahead, hit submit, and let's see what's provided when we use the
display additional statistics option.
First, let's look at the command that appears.
Instead of just saying summarize systolic blood pressure at exam one, I
now afterwards put , detail, telling stata I want some more information.
Now what exactly do I get with this extra information?
Let's look.
So you can see that over here on the right hand side, I get a lot of the
same information that was displayed in the standard summarize command.
I get the number of non missing observations, get the mean, the
standard deviation.
And then I get some additional statistics down here, such as the
variance, and a few other summary statistics that we
don't know about yet.
Anyway, what I'm specifically looking for here is the median.
So to find the median, I'm going to go to the percentiles column, and I'm
going to remember from class this week that the median is the 50th percentile
of my data sets.
So I go down to the 50th percentile, and I see that the median systolic
blood pressure at exam one is 129.
What if I wanted the range of systolic blood pressure?
Now I could have actually gotten the range of systolic blood pressure from
just using the plain old summarize command without the additional
statistics.
But I want to show you how to find that when I get those additional
statistics as well.
So to calculate the range, I'm going to take the smallest observation of my
data set and the largest observation of my data set, and I'm going to take
the difference between those two.
So I go down to the command window, and I would say
display 295 minus 83.5.
And I would find that the range of my data set is 211.5.
Alternatively, if I wanted the interquartile range, I'm going to have
to go, and I'm going to take the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile,
and take the difference of those.
So I would say display 144 minus 117.5, and I find out the my
inter-quartile range is 26.5.
OK, so right now, we've just looked at the general systolic blood pressure in
the entire population.
Let's say I want to look at specific sub-populations.
Let's say, specifically, I wanted to break it up by gender or by sex.
So to use the summarize command within a specific sex, I could go back, call
the summarize window.
I can go to this by, if, in tab.
I could repeat the command by groups, and I would say I want to repeat it by
sex at exam one, hit submit, and now you see that I get a bunch of summary
statistics for sex equals male, and for sex equals female.
And if I look at the command that was actually run in Stata, what it says
is, by sex, sort, and then summarize systolic blood pressure at exam 1.
The display output's going to be a little more concise if you get rid of
the details, so you can see specifically here that it's
summarizing for both males and females.
So if I get that window for summarize again--and let's say I really didn't
want any information about females there.
I just want to calculate some statistics for males--
I could go down, and I could say, restrict observations, and I could
say, if sex 1 == 1, because if sex 1 = 1, that means that it's a male.
And then I hit submit.
And now you see that I only get information for males in my data set.
Alternatively, if I just wanted to use the command line to calculate
sex-specific information, I could say by sort, sex 1 : summarize, sysbp1.
And I'm going to get the same information that I saw before.
Similarly, I could say summarize sysbp1 if sex 1 is = to 1, and get
information only for males.
So we've seen how to use the drop down menus, as well as the command line for
summarizing within entire populations, as well as within sub-populations in
our data set.
But thusfar, we've really only looked at a continuous variable, namely
systolic blood pressure at exam one.
So let's move on now, and let's start talking about categorical covariants.
We've been talking about sex, so let's continue with that.
Let's say tabulate sex 1, and I can now obtain the number of males and
females in the data set at exam one, or a baseline.
So I see that at exam one, there were 1,944 males, 2,490 females, for a
total of 4,434 study observations.
If I wanted to do this calculation via the drop down menus, I would go
statistics, summaries, tables, and test, tables, and then I would go down
to one-way tables.
The categorical variable that I'm interested in is sex 1.
Hit submit, and you see that I get the exact same table as I saw before.
Now, we talked a little bit about missing information before.
If I just run the tabulate command as it is, missing observations are going
to be deleted.
If I were to say comma missing, then what would happen is, I would get a
variable or another row in my table that displayed the number of missing
observations for sex 1.
Unfortunately, I chose a covariant that doesn't have any missing data,
but there's going to be some covariants in our data set that do
have missing data.
Let's see if we can find one.
All right.
So we're going to look at a variable that does have some missing data,
namely, sex 3, which is the sex at exam three.
Now by exam three, some individuals in the data set have died.
So for those individuals, they're going to have the missing value for
the sex 3 indicator.
So I can see that now, at exam three, there's 1,387 males, 1,876 females,
and then we have 1,171 individuals who have missing data.
So you can see what this missing option does.
If I hadn't included the missing option--
now I'm going to get a table where the total number of observations is no
longer 4,434.
Rather, it's 3,263.
So this missing option is another way to characterize missing data
in your data set.
So we looked at how to create a one way table.
That's a table for a binary indicator.
Now we're going to look at what if we have two binary indicators that we're
going to compare?
For example, I want to know the answer to the question, how many women in our
data set have prevalent hypertension at exam one?

So again, I can use the tabulate command.
I can say tabulate sex 1 prev hype 1, and hit enter.
And now, rather than this one way table, I'm going to get a two by two
table, where my rows contain the number of males and females, and in
the column, I have prevalent hypertension at exam one.
So if I know the number of women with prevalent hypertension, I go female,
in the female row, and then I say yes with prevalent hypertension, and I see
that the answer to this is then going to be that there are 799 women with
prevalent hypertension at exam one.
So this is a brief introduction to two by two tables, and we're going to
delve way more into two by two tables later in the course.
So I'm just going to leave it at that for right now, but you can see how
useful this tabulate command would be in practice.
The last command we're going to look at is list.
So if I wanted to list every observation in my data set, I would
just type list, hit enter, and I'm going to get way more information than
I actually want.
So let's break that.
Now let's say I only wanted to list systolic blood pressure at exam one.
Then I'm going to get the systolic blood pressure for every individual in
my data set at exam one, by just typing list, systolic
blood pressure 1.
Last, let's say I only wanted to list systolic blood pressure for the first
50 observations in my data set.
I would say list systolic blood pressure in 1 through 50.
So you can see now, I only get the first 50 observations in the data set.
Alternatively, I could do this through the drop down menus by going data,
describe data, list data.
And within this, I could say, I want to list systolic blood pressure 1, and
by, if, in--
I only want to use observations 1 through 50.
Hit OK, and I get the exact same command that I just ran.
So that's the drop down menu versus command line.
In this exercise, we've gone through how to use the summarize command,
tabulate, describe, code book, list, and hopefully now, you have a good
idea of how you can go about doing exploratory data
analysis within Stata.
Thank you.
